README.md, before:

# predtimechart

A JavaScript (ES6 ECMAScript) module for forecast visualization.


# Steps to use the component

To use the component in your app, you'll need to add the following to your HTML:

1. add `<script>` and stylesheet `<link>` tags to the `<head>`
2. add a `<div>` to the `<body>` for the component to fill
3. add a `<script>` in the `<body>` that initializes the component via the (default) `App` object that's exported

See the "HTML file example" section below for an example, and see the "JavaScript API" section for how to initialize the component.


# HTML file example

In your HTML file, load the required CSS and JavaScript files:

1. In the `<head>`, load Bootstrap 4 and hub-vis files:

```html
<!-- Bootstrap 4 -->
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/popper.js/1.11.0/umd/popper.js"></script>
<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.12.4/jquery.min.js"></script>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@4.1.3/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css">
<script src="https://stackpath.bootstrapcdn.com/bootstrap/4.4.1/js/bootstrap.min.js"></script>

<!-- predtimechart -->
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-2.12.1.min.js"></script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/moment.js/2.29.3/moment.min.js"></script>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/reichlab/predtimechart@1.0.0/predtimechart.css">
```

2. In the `<body>`, add the row `<div>` that will hold the component:

```html

<div id="forecastViz_row" class="row">
</div>
```

3. In the `<body>`, load and use the hub-viz module:

```html

<script type="module">
    // import the module's entry point (the `App` object)
    import App from 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/reichlab/predtimechart@1.0.0/predtimechart.js';

    // set up _fetchData, _calcUemForecasts (optional), and options
    function _fetchData(isForecast, targetKey, unitAbbrev, referenceDate) { ... }

    function _calcUemForecasts(componentModels, targetKey, referenceDate, userModelName) { ... }

    const options = {...};

    // initialize the component
    App.initialize('forecastViz_row', _fetchData, false, options, _calcUemForecasts);
</script>
```

# JavaScript API

The component is accessed via the `App` object, and is initialized via the `App.initialize()` function. After that, everything else is taken care of by the app. `App.initialize(componentDiv, _fetchData, isIndicateRedraw, options, _calcUemForecasts)` takes these args:

- `componentDiv`: `id` of the empty `<div>` to place the component into.
- `_fetchData`: function to retrieve truth and forecast data. It is called whenever the plot needs updating. See the "fetchData data format" section for details. It takes these args:
    - `isForecast`: `boolean` indicating type of data to retrieve. `true` means retrieve forecast data and `false` means get truth data.
    - `targetKey`: `string` naming the target of interest. Must be one of the values in the options object's `target_variables` value.
    - `unitAbbrev`: "" unit "". Must be one of the values in the options object's `units` value.
    - `referenceDate`: "" reference date "". Must be one of the values in the options object's `available_as_ofs` value.
- `isIndicateRedraw`: `boolean` that controls whether the plot area should be grayed out while waiting for data requests. Useful for applications that have a noticeable delay when fetching data.
- `options`: `object` that contains initialization data. See the "Options object" section for details.
- `calcUemForecasts`: optional human judgement ensemble model function. pass null to disable the feature. It takes these args:
    - `componentModels`: an array of model names, a subset of those in the `options` object (see below).
    - `targetKey`: same as passed to `_fetchData` above.
    - `referenceDate`: ""
    - `userModelName`: The model's displayed name. Must be a valid name, e.g., no spaces, commas, etc.


# Options object

The component is initialized by a JavaScript object with the following keys and values. See the "Example options object" for a detailed example.

- 'target_variables': `array` of `object`s defining the target variables in the data. Each object contains three keys:
    - 'value': used as the main value that's passed around for the target
    - 'text': human-readable text
    - 'plot_text': plot text (purpose: TBD)
- 'initial_target_var': `target_variables` `value` key to use for the initial plot
- 'units': `array` of `object`s defining the units (typically locations) in the data. Each object contains two keys:
  - 'value': used as the main value that's passed around for the unit
  - 'text': human-readable text
- 'initial_unit':  `units` `value` key to use for the initial plot
- 'intervals': `array` of one or more integers between 0 and 100 inclusive, representing percentages (purpose: TBD)
- 'initial_interval': `intervals` value to use for the initial plot
- 'available_as_ofs': `object` that maps `target_variables` `value` to an `array` of dates in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format that have truth and/or forecasts available
- 'initial_as_of': `string` specifying the initial date from 'available_as_ofs' (in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format) to use for the initially-selected _as_of_ date
- 'current_date':  `available_as_ofs` `value` key to use for the initial plot
- 'models': `array` of model names (`string`s) that provide data
- 'initial_checked_models': `models` value(s) to use for the initial plot
- 'disclaimer': `string` providing any important information users should know

## Example options object

Here's a real-world example from the [COVID-19 Forecast Hub](https://covid19forecasthub.org/) project. Only the first two items in the lists are shown.

```json
{
  "target_variables": [
    {
      "value": "day_ahead_cumulative_deaths",
      "text": "day ahead cumulative deaths",
      "plot_text": "day ahead cumulative deaths"
    },
    {
      "value": "day_ahead_incident_deaths",
      "text": "day ahead incident deaths",
      "plot_text": "day ahead incident deaths"
    },
    "..."
  ],
  "initial_target_var": "week_ahead_incident_deaths",
  "units": [
    {"value": "US", "text": "US"},
    {"value": "01", "text": "Alabama"},
    "..."
  ],
  "initial_unit": "US",
  "intervals": ["0%", "50%", "95%"],
  "initial_interval": "95%",
  "available_as_ofs": {
    "day_ahead_cumulative_deaths": [
      "2020-03-15",
      "2020-03-22",
      "..."
    ],
    "day_ahead_incident_deaths": [
      "2020-03-15",
      "2020-03-22",
      "..."
    ],
    "...": "..."
  },
  "initial_as_of": "2022-10-12",
  "current_date": "2022-10-22",
  "models": [
    "COVIDhub-baseline",
    "COVIDhub-ensemble",
    "..."
  ],
  "initial_checked_models": [
    "COVIDhub-baseline",
    "COVIDhub-ensemble"
  ],
  "disclaimer": "Most forecasts have failed to reliably predict rapid changes in the trends of reported cases and hospitalizations..."
}
```

# fetchData data format

As described above, the `fetchData(isForecast, targetKey, unitAbbrev, referenceDate)` function passed to `App.initialize()` is responsible for returning truth and forecast data as directed by the `isForecast` arg. It uses the other three args to retrieve and return the requested data. The data is in the following formats.


## fetchData truth data format

Truth data is represented as an `object` with x/y pairs represented as columns, where x=date and y=truth_value. The dates must correspond to those in the options object's `available_as_ofs`. For example:

```json
{
  "date": ["2020-03-15", "2020-03-22", "..."],
  "y": [0, 15, "..."]
}
```

## fetchData forecasts data format

Forecast data is an `object` with one entry for each model in the the options object's `models`, each of which is in turn an `object` with entries for target end date of the forecast and the quantiles required to use to display point predictions and 50% or 95% prediction intervals. For example:

```json
{
  "UChicagoCHATTOPADHYAY-UnIT": {
    "target_end_date": ["2021-09-11", "2021-09-18"],
    "q0.025": [1150165.71, 1176055.78],
    "q0.25": [1151044.42, 1178626.67],
    "q0.5": [1151438.21, 1179605.9],
    "q0.75": [1152121.55, 1180758.16],
    "q0.975": [1152907.55, 1182505.14]
  },
  "USC-SI_kJalpha": {
    "target_end_date": ["2021-09-11", "2021-09-18"],
    "q0.025": [941239.7761, 775112.557],
    "q0.25": [1010616.1863, 896160.705],
    "q0.5": [1149400.162, 1137280.4614],
    "q0.75": [1313447.0159, 1461013.716],
    "q0.975": [1456851.692, 1771312.0932]
  },
  "...": "..."
}
```

# Running unit tests

We use [QUnit](https://qunitjs.com/) for our unit tests. Either load the page [test.html](test.html) in your browser (automatically runs the tests), or install in npm per [Getting Started](https://qunitjs.com/intro/):
```bash
cd "<predtimechart repo root>"
npm install --save-dev qunit
```

And then run the tests:
```bash
npm run
# or:
qunit
```


# Human judgement ensemble model

Predtimechart includes a beta feature that supports creating an ensemble forecast file based on the existing models initialized in the app. These input "component models" are used by the human judgement ensemble model code to calculate forecasts based on those models' data. For now the arithmetic mean is used, but future versions will support other calculations. Note that the feature must be enabled by the predtimechart developer to be available. Otherwise, the "Actions" dropdown menu documented below will not be present.

## Usage
All interactions with the feature take place using a new "Actions" dropdown menu next to the "Shuffle Colors" button in the left sidebar. The actions are:

- **Add User Ensemble** (always enabled): Creates a new model or replaces the existing one using the currently-selected models as components. Visually, the model works like any other model (shows in the model list and the plot, can be checked/unchecked, re-calculated when changing outcome/unit/reference date, etc.)
- **Remove User Ensemble** (enabled if model exists): Removes the model from model list.
- **Download User Ensemble CSV** (enabled ""): Calls the _`calcUemForecasts` function passed to `App.initialize()` (see above) compute and download a cross-unit forecast. The CSV file format is documented [here](https://docs.zoltardata.com/fileformats/#forecast-data-format-csv).


A typical Human judgement ensemble model workflow is:

1. Explore the existing models' forecasts to decide which might make good component models.
1. Select those component models in the models list in the left sidebar under "Select Models".
1. Select the "Add User Ensemble" item in the "Actions" dropdown menu to add the "User Ensemble" model to the app.
1. Explore the new model's forecasts and either move to the next step if you're happy with them, or repeat the above steps to try other component models.
1. Select "Download User Ensemble CSV" in the "Actions" dropdown menu. This will contact the server, which will compute a forecasts for all units in the system, create a CSV file, and send it back to the app. When done, you will see a notification that the file was downloaded and saved.

Commit message:

[Add option to specify initial x axis range when the page loads #13]

README.md, after:

# predtimechart

A JavaScript (ES6 ECMAScript) module for forecast visualization.


# Steps to use the component

To use the component in your app, you'll need to add the following to your HTML:

1. add `<script>` and stylesheet `<link>` tags to the `<head>`
2. add a `<div>` to the `<body>` for the component to fill
3. add a `<script>` in the `<body>` that initializes the component via the (default) `App` object that's exported

See the "HTML file example" section below for an example, and see the "JavaScript API" section for how to initialize the component.


# HTML file example

In your HTML file, load the required CSS and JavaScript files:

1. In the `<head>`, load Bootstrap 4 and hub-vis files:

```html
<!-- Bootstrap 4 -->
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/popper.js/1.11.0/umd/popper.js"></script>
<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.12.4/jquery.min.js"></script>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@4.1.3/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css">
<script src="https://stackpath.bootstrapcdn.com/bootstrap/4.4.1/js/bootstrap.min.js"></script>

<!-- predtimechart -->
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-2.12.1.min.js"></script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/moment.js/2.29.3/moment.min.js"></script>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/reichlab/predtimechart@1.0.0/predtimechart.css">
```

2. In the `<body>`, add the row `<div>` that will hold the component:

```html

<div id="forecastViz_row" class="row">
</div>
```

3. In the `<body>`, load and use the hub-viz module:

```html

<script type="module">
    // import the module's entry point (the `App` object)
    import App from 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/reichlab/predtimechart@1.0.0/predtimechart.js';

    // set up _fetchData, _calcUemForecasts (optional), and options
    function _fetchData(isForecast, targetKey, unitAbbrev, referenceDate) { ... }

    function _calcUemForecasts(componentModels, targetKey, referenceDate, userModelName) { ... }

    const options = {...};

    // initialize the component
    App.initialize('forecastViz_row', _fetchData, false, options, _calcUemForecasts);
</script>
```

# JavaScript API

The component is accessed via the `App` object, and is initialized via the `App.initialize()` function. After that, everything else is taken care of by the app. `App.initialize(componentDiv, _fetchData, isIndicateRedraw, options, _calcUemForecasts)` takes these args:

- `componentDiv`: `id` of the empty `<div>` to place the component into.
- `_fetchData`: function to retrieve truth and forecast data. It is called whenever the plot needs updating. See the "fetchData data format" section for details. It takes these args:
    - `isForecast`: `boolean` indicating type of data to retrieve. `true` means retrieve forecast data and `false` means get truth data.
    - `targetKey`: `string` naming the target of interest. Must be one of the values in the options object's `target_variables` value.
    - `unitAbbrev`: "" unit "". Must be one of the values in the options object's `units` value.
    - `referenceDate`: "" reference date "". Must be one of the values in the options object's `available_as_ofs` value.
- `isIndicateRedraw`: `boolean` that controls whether the plot area should be grayed out while waiting for data requests. Useful for applications that have a noticeable delay when fetching data.
- `options`: `object` that contains initialization data. See the "Options object" section for details.
- `calcUemForecasts`: optional human judgement ensemble model function. pass null to disable the feature. It takes these args:
    - `componentModels`: an array of model names, a subset of those in the `options` object (see below).
    - `targetKey`: same as passed to `_fetchData` above.
    - `referenceDate`: ""
    - `userModelName`: The model's displayed name. Must be a valid name, e.g., no spaces, commas, etc.


# Options object

The component is initialized by a JavaScript object with the following keys and values. See the "Example options object" for a detailed example.

- `target_variables`: `array` of `object`s defining the target variables in the data. Each object contains three keys:
    - 'value': used as the main value that's passed around for the target
    - 'text': human-readable text
    - 'plot_text': plot text (purpose: TBD)
- `initial_target_var`: `target_variables` `value` key to use for the initial plot
- `units`: `array` of `object`s defining the units (typically locations) in the data. Each object contains two keys:
  - `value`: used as the main value that's passed around for the unit
  - `text`: human-readable text
- `initial_unit`:  `units` `value` key to use for the initial plot
- `intervals`: `array` of one or more integers between 0 and 100 inclusive, representing percentages (purpose: TBD)
- `initial_interval`: `intervals` value to use for the initial plot
- `available_as_ofs`: `object` that maps `target_variables` `value` to an `array` of dates in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format that have truth and/or forecasts available
- `initial_as_of`: `string` specifying the initial date from 'available_as_ofs' (in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format) to use for the initially-selected _as_of_ date
- `current_date`:  `available_as_ofs` `value` key to use for the initial plot
- `models`: `array` of model names (`string`s) that provide data
- `initial_checked_models`: `models` value(s) to use for the initial plot
- `disclaimer`: `string` providing any important information users should know
- `initial_xaxis_range`: optional `array` of two dates in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format that specify the initial xaxis range to use. To not initialize the range, either don't pass this key or pass `null` for its value

## Example options object

Here's a real-world example from the [COVID-19 Forecast Hub](https://covid19forecasthub.org/) project. Only the first two items in the lists are shown.

```json
{
  "target_variables": [
    {
      "value": "day_ahead_cumulative_deaths",
      "text": "day ahead cumulative deaths",
      "plot_text": "day ahead cumulative deaths"
    },
    {
      "value": "day_ahead_incident_deaths",
      "text": "day ahead incident deaths",
      "plot_text": "day ahead incident deaths"
    },
    "..."
  ],
  "initial_target_var": "week_ahead_incident_deaths",
  "units": [
    {"value": "US", "text": "US"},
    {"value": "01", "text": "Alabama"},
    "..."
  ],
  "initial_unit": "US",
  "intervals": ["0%", "50%", "95%"],
  "initial_interval": "95%",
  "available_as_ofs": {
    "day_ahead_cumulative_deaths": [
      "2020-03-15",
      "2020-03-22",
      "..."
    ],
    "day_ahead_incident_deaths": [
      "2020-03-15",
      "2020-03-22",
      "..."
    ],
    "...": "..."
  },
  "initial_as_of": "2022-10-12",
  "current_date": "2022-10-22",
  "models": [
    "COVIDhub-baseline",
    "COVIDhub-ensemble",
    "..."
  ],
  "initial_checked_models": [
    "COVIDhub-baseline",
    "COVIDhub-ensemble"
  ],
  "disclaimer": "Most forecasts have failed to reliably predict rapid changes in the trends of reported cases and hospitalizations..."
}
```

# fetchData data format

As described above, the `fetchData(isForecast, targetKey, unitAbbrev, referenceDate)` function passed to `App.initialize()` is responsible for returning truth and forecast data as directed by the `isForecast` arg. It uses the other three args to retrieve and return the requested data. The data is in the following formats.


## fetchData truth data format

Truth data is represented as an `object` with x/y pairs represented as columns, where x=date and y=truth_value. The dates must correspond to those in the options object's `available_as_ofs`. For example:

```json
{
  "date": ["2020-03-15", "2020-03-22", "..."],
  "y": [0, 15, "..."]
}
```

## fetchData forecasts data format

Forecast data is an `object` with one entry for each model in the options object's `models`, each of which is in turn an `object` with entries for target end date of the forecast and the quantiles required to use to display point predictions and 50% or 95% prediction intervals. For example:

```json
{
  "UChicagoCHATTOPADHYAY-UnIT": {
    "target_end_date": ["2021-09-11", "2021-09-18"],
    "q0.025": [1150165.71, 1176055.78],
    "q0.25": [1151044.42, 1178626.67],
    "q0.5": [1151438.21, 1179605.9],
    "q0.75": [1152121.55, 1180758.16],
    "q0.975": [1152907.55, 1182505.14]
  },
  "USC-SI_kJalpha": {
    "target_end_date": ["2021-09-11", "2021-09-18"],
    "q0.025": [941239.7761, 775112.557],
    "q0.25": [1010616.1863, 896160.705],
    "q0.5": [1149400.162, 1137280.4614],
    "q0.75": [1313447.0159, 1461013.716],
    "q0.975": [1456851.692, 1771312.0932]
  },
  "...": "..."
}
```

# Running unit tests

We use [QUnit](https://qunitjs.com/) for our unit tests. Either load the page [test.html](test.html) in your browser (automatically runs the tests), or install in npm per [Getting Started](https://qunitjs.com/intro/):
```bash
cd "<predtimechart repo root>"
npm install --save-dev qunit
```

And then run the tests:
```bash
npm run
# or:
qunit
```


# Human judgement ensemble model

Predtimechart includes a beta feature that supports creating an ensemble forecast file based on the existing models initialized in the app. These input "component models" are used by the human judgement ensemble model code to calculate forecasts based on those models' data. For now the arithmetic mean is used, but future versions will support other calculations. Note that the feature must be enabled by the predtimechart developer to be available. Otherwise, the "Actions" dropdown menu documented below will not be present.

## Usage
All interactions with the feature take place using a new "Actions" dropdown menu next to the "Shuffle Colors" button in the left sidebar. The actions are:

- **Add User Ensemble** (always enabled): Creates a new model or replaces the existing one using the currently-selected models as components. Visually, the model works like any other model (shows in the model list and the plot, can be checked/unchecked, re-calculated when changing outcome/unit/reference date, etc.)
- **Remove User Ensemble** (enabled if model exists): Removes the model from model list.
- **Download User Ensemble CSV** (enabled ""): Calls the _`calcUemForecasts` function passed to `App.initialize()` (see above) compute and download a cross-unit forecast. The CSV file format is documented [here](https://docs.zoltardata.com/fileformats/#forecast-data-format-csv).


A typical Human judgement ensemble model workflow is:

1. Explore the existing models' forecasts to decide which might make good component models.
1. Select those component models in the models list in the left sidebar under "Select Models".
1. Select the "Add User Ensemble" item in the "Actions" dropdown menu to add the "User Ensemble" model to the app.
1. Explore the new model's forecasts and either move to the next step if you're happy with them, or repeat the above steps to try other component models.
1. Select "Download User Ensemble CSV" in the "Actions" dropdown menu. This will contact the server, which will compute a forecasts for all units in the system, create a CSV file, and send it back to the app. When done, you will see a notification that the file was downloaded and saved.
